M. Mandy Dawson ( Muriel Mandy Dawson; July 18, 1956) was a Democratic member of the Florida Senate, representing the 29th District from 1999 to 2008. Previously she was a member of the Florida House of Representatives from 1993 through 1998. == Early life and education == Dawson was born in Fort Lauderdale and moved to Daytona Beach when she was six years old. She attended Florida A&M; University from 1975 to 1980 and earned a Bachelor of Science degree in social work from Barry University. == Career == She was the first African-American female elected to the Florida Legislature from Broward County. During her time in the legislature, she worked on bills restoring civil rights for ex-offenders, penalties for leaving children in locked cars, and keeping Black physicians on managed care panels to address health care inequalities. Since leaving office, she has worked as a political campaign manager. == Personal life == She married Hobson Bethune, a retired Marine and longtime youth athletics coach, in 2010. Bethune died in 2017. Mandy Dawson suffered from chronic back pain requiring hospitalization and surgery. She later became addicted to prescription drugs. In 2002, Dawson was arrested and charged with felony prescription drug fraud for altering a painkiller prescription from 60 pills to 160. In return for dismissal of the charges, she entered a pretrial intervention program. On July 20, 2011, Dawson was charged with federal income tax evasion and failure to file tax returns. In court papers filed in early February 2012, Dawson signaled her intention to plead guilty to the tax evasion charges."Ex-Fla. lawmaker Mandy Dawson sentenced to 6 months for tax evasion", miamiherald.com. July 20, 2012. ==References== ==External links== *Project Vote Smart - Senator Muriel Mandy Dawson (FL) profile |- |- Category:Democratic Party Florida state senators Category:Democratic Party members of the Florida House of Representatives Category:1956 births Category:Politicians from Fort Lauderdale, Florida Category:Living people Category:Women state legislators in Florida Category:Florida politicians convicted of crimes Category:African-American state legislators in Florida Category:20th-century American politicians Category:20th-century American women politicians Category:21st-century American politicians Category:21st-century American women politicians Category:20th-century African-American women Category:20th-century African- American politicians Category:21st-century African-American women Category:21st-century African-American politicians