Margaret Elizabeth Cannon is a Canadian engineer specializing in geomatics engineering and president Emerita of the University of Calgary. From 2010 to 2018, she served as the university's eighth president and vice-chancellor, the first alumna to hold that position. ==Early life and education== Born in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Cannon developed an early interest in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). She completed a Bachelor of Applied Science in Mathematics at Acadia University in 1982, before moving to Calgary, Alberta to complete a BSc, MSc and PhD in Geomatics Engineering at the University of Calgary.Day, Jim (19 June 2010). "P.E.I. native named University of Calgary president". The Guardian ==Scientific and administrative career== Cannon has led research at the forefront of Global Positioning Systems (GPS) since 1984, commercializing technology to over 200 agencies worldwide.Leslie, Melody Ward (November/December 2007). "Elizabeth Cannon: Geomatics Innovator". Inside GNSS, pp. 18–21 She has served on the National Advisory Board on Earth Sciences to the Canadian Minister of Natural Resources, as past president of the U.S. Institute of Navigation, and as a past director of the Canada Foundation for Innovation. Cannon has also served as the Chair of Universities Canada, as Co-Chair of the Business-Higher Education Roundtable, and as a member of the Board of Governors of Sidra Medicine in Qatar."Dr. Elizabeth Cannon – Sidra Medicine". www.sidra.org. Cannon is a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, a fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering, an elected foreign associate of the National Academy of Engineering, and an elected Corresponding Member of the Mexican Academy of Engineering. From 1997 to 2002, Cannon held the NSERC/Petro-Canada Chair for Women in Science and Engineering for the Prairie Region. In this capacity, Cannon worked to raise public awareness about science and engineering careers for women, as well as conduct research on the factors that influence the decision to pursue a career in engineering. Cannon also developed programs to encourage women to explore careers in STEM fields, including the largest online mentorship program of its kind in Canada, Cybermentor.“About Cybermentor - Why It Works.” www.cybermentor.ca. Prior to her appointment as president, Cannon was the dean of the Schulich School of Engineering at the University of Calgary from 2006 to 2010. She was installed as the university's president and vice-chancellor in July 2010,Nelson, Chris (2 October 2011). "Cannon Positions U of C for the Future". Calgary Herald. and served in the role until December 31, 2018. During her tenure, the university launched a comprehensive institutional strategy called Eyes High and expanded its campus infrastructure with multiple new facilities, such as the Taylor Institute for Teaching and Learning,Dharssi, Alia (18 April 2016). “5 interesting facts about the U of C’s new Taylor Institute.” Calgary Herald. W. A. Ranches at the University of Calgary,Collins, Erin (21 September 2018). “Local ranchers give land and cattle worth $44M to U of C vet school.” CBC News. and the Life Sciences Innovation HubToneguzzi, Mario (29 November 2018). “U of C creating innovation hub to drive economic diversification.” Calgary’s Business. — among several others. Under her leadership, the university also launched the $1.3 billion fundraising campaign, Energize: The Campaign for Eyes High, which encompassed the naming of the Cumming School of MedicineCryderman, Kelly (17 June 2014). “Businessman makes largest-ever donation to University of Calgary.” The Globe and Mail. and the Werklund School of Education.(November 1, 2013). “Alberta entrepreneur gives $25M to U of C education faculty.” CBC News. Upon concluding her role, Cannon received the title of President Emerita. ==Honours and awards== In 1998, Cannon was selected as one of Canada’s Top 40 Under 40, and in 2006, she was named as one of Canada’s Top 100 Most Powerful Women by the Women's Executive Network. She has also been recognized with the Wired Woman Pioneer Award from the Wired Woman Society in 2002 and the Betty Vetter Award for Research from the Women in Engineering Programs and Advocates Network in 2001. In recognition of her impact on geomatics engineering, Cannon received the Johannes Kepler Award from the U.S. Institute of Navigation in 2001,"2001 Kepler Award - Dr. M. Elizabeth Cannon". www.ion.org. APEGA’s Centennial Leadership Award in 2012, the Gold Medal Award from Engineers Canada in 2013,“Engineers Canada Awards 2013 – Gold Medal Award Winner Video.” www.engineerscanada.ca. and the NSERC E.W.R. Steacie Fellowship from 2002 to 2004.“Past Winner: 2002 E.W.R. Steacie Memorial Fellowship – Elizabeth Cannon.” www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca. In 2011, she was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering for the innovative use of GPS data for a wide range of applications and for pioneering the field of geomatics. Cannon has received Honorary Doctorates from the University of Ottawa, Acadia University and the Université de Montréal, as well as an Honorary Bachelor of Business Administration from the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology. On 27 June 2019, Cannon was appointed as an Officer of the Order of Canada for her contributions to academia and STEM in Canada, as an engineer and university administrator. Cannon was also appointed as a Member to the Alberta Order of Excellence in 2022. ==References== ==External links== * Millar, Anne and Wells, Mary (30 October 2017). "Engineering taught Elizabeth Cannon how to be a leader". CIM Magazine. Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum Category:Acadia University alumni Category:Canadian academics in engineering Category:Canadian university and college faculty deans Category:Women deans (academic) Category:Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada Category:Fellows of the Canadian Academy of Engineering Category:People from Charlottetown Category:University of Calgary alumni Category:Academic staff of the University of Calgary Category:Living people Category:Canadian university and college chief executives Category:Canadian women engineers Category:20th-century Canadian engineers Category:21st-century Canadian engineers Category:20th-century women engineers Category:21st-century women engineers Category:Women heads of universities and colleges Category:Officers of the Order of Canada Category:Foreign associates of the National Academy of Engineering Category:20th-century Canadian women scientists Category:1963 births