Manvinder "Vindi" Singh Banga (born 31 October 1954) is an Indian businessman. He is a senior partner at the private equity fund Clayton, Dubilier & Rice. ==Early life== Banga was born on 31 October 1954 in Simla (then in the state of Punjab) into a Sikh family, the son of Lt.Gen. Harbhajan Singh Banga, a decorated General in the Indian Army, and his wife Jaswant Kaur. Banga graduated from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi in 1975 and did BTech degree in mechanical engineering. He earned a master in business administration from the Indian Institute of Management (IIM-A). ==Career== Banga worked for Unilever for 33 years. He served as the chairman and chief executive officer of Hindustan Unilever. In February 2005, as part of a major reorganization of Unilever's upper management, Banga was elevated to the Unilever Executive, as the global head of the foods division and ultimately took over the HPC division as well - effectively running all of Unilever’s categories across the globe. He was also responsible for their sustainability initiative."Banga elevated as global foods head ", The Financial Express, 11 February 2005 Banga is currently a non-executive director on the boards of Glaxo Smith Kline, Thomson Reuters and Marks & Spencer. He is also on the board of the Confederation of British Industry. He is a senior partner at private equity firm Clayton, Dubilier & Rice. He served on the Prime Minister of India's Council for Trade & Industry from 2004 to 2014. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan by the President of India in 2010. Vindi Banga has been appointed as Chair of the UK Government Investments. ==Philanthropy== Vindi is the Chairman the Marie Curie charity in the United Kingdom, one of the leading charitable providers of palliative care services. He is also the Chair and Trustee of The Karta Initiative, a non profit organisation. ==Personal life== Banga's brother, Ajay Banga, was the Executive Chairman of Mastercard.(12 April 2010.) "MasterCard Names Ajay Banga President and Chief Executive Officer Succeeding Robert W. Selander." Mastercard Accessed January 2012 He retired from this position on December 31, 2021 to join General Atlantic. Banga has two sons, both based in the UK: Tavraj Banga, a senior executive at Helios Investment Partners; and Udaibir Banga, a private equity investor at CVC Capital Partners. ==References== Category:Indian chief executives Category:1954 births Category:Living people Category:People from Shimla Category:Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad alumni Category:Unilever people Category:Punjabi people Category:Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in trade and industry Category:Delhi Public School alumni Category:Businesspeople from Himachal Pradesh